beware of raw in erb (#186)
andycroll/andycroll.com: _posts/2023/2023-07-17-beware-of-raw-erb.md

---
title: "Beware of <%== in your erb files"
description: "The danger of an extra equals"
layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2023/beware-of-raw-erb"
  alt: "A hand holding a piece of sushi with chopsticks"
  credit: "Luc Bercoth"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/REPQln8St2E"

---

XSS, which stands for Cross-Site Scripting, is a common vulnerability that allows attackers to inject malicious scripts into web pages viewed by other users. These scripts can be used to steal sensitive information, manipulate the page's content, or perform other malicious actions on behalf of the attacker.

One of the benefits of frameworks like Rails is that XSS protection is built-in and automatically applied to user-provided content. Rails uses a combination of context-aware output encoding and automatic escaping to mitigate XSS vulnerabilities.

> Rails automatically escapes HTML entities when rendering user input within HTML templates by default then uses a special class called `ActiveSupport::SafeBuffer` to handle string concatenation and rendering of user-generated content. `SafeBuffer` is designed to prevent inadvertent double-escaping or bypassing of encoding mechanisms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rails automatically escapes HTML entities when rendering user input within HTML templates by default, and then uses a special class called `ActiveSupport::SafeBuffer` to handle string concatenation and the final rendering of the user-generated content. `SafeBuffer` is designed to prevent inadvertent double-escaping of the string or bypassing of encoding mechanisms.
```

But you can, and folks do, go around it.

## Instead of…

…using:

```erb
<%== @some_text_to_render %>
```

## Use…

> …Rails’ sanitization methods to ensure content is sanitized before it gets to the view:

Reviewer: *Rails's — the grammatically correct way is to have a trailing "apostrophe 's'" unless the word represents a plural!

Reviewer: Re "santization/sanitized" — I know the methods are spelt that way, but technically you're using it in a UK English piece of text...but yeah, this is very minor and probably best to just keep it with the 'z's.

Author: ```suggestion
…Rails’s sanitization methods to ensure content is made safe before it gets to the view:
```

```ruby
# In the controller
@some_text_to_render = "some text #{params[:user_text]}".sanitize
```

```erb
<%= @some_text_to_render %>
```

## Why?

> This is primarily about defending your application against malicious user input. Using the `<%== something %>` ERB tags in a Rails view template is the same as writing `<%= raw(something) %>` which completely avoids the protections offered by SafeBuffer.

Reviewer: * `SafeBuffer`

Author: ```suggestion
This is primarily about defending your application against malicious user input. Using the `<%== something %>` ERB tags in a Rails view template is the same as writing `<%= raw(something) %>` which completely avoids the protections offered by `SafeBuffer`.
```

> This is primarily about defending your application against malicious user input. Using the `<%== something %>` ERB tags in a Rails view template is the same as writing `<%= raw(something) %>` which completely avoids the protections offered by `SafeBuffer`.

Reviewer: comma before "which"

Author: ```suggestion
This is primarily about defending your application against malicious user input. Using the `<%== something %>` ERB tags in a Rails view template is the same as writing `<%= raw(something) %>`, which completely avoids the protections offered by `SafeBuffer`.
```

> If you see `<%==` or `<% raw` in your ERB, consider it a bad smell. You should carefully evaluate the context, the source of the data, and the potential security risks before deciding to bypass HTML escaping. In general, don't.

Reviewer: Did you do this Oxford comma on your lonesome??

> If you look inside [ActiveSupport::SafeBuffer](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/SafeBuffer.html) you’ll see methods like `html_safe?` which are the methods Rails uses to manage the safety of user input that you're displaying in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you look inside [ActiveSupport::SafeBuffer](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/SafeBuffer.html), you’ll see methods like `html_safe?`, which are the methods Rails uses to manage the safety of user input that you're displaying in the browser.
```

> As the [docs for `html_safe`](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/String.html#method-i-html_safe) say “It should never be called on user input”. You should let Rails do what it is good at.

Reviewer: Hmmmmmmm......I might have a couple things to review...

## Why not?

There’s a couple of places you regularly see the use of unescaped HTML.

> The [`pagy` gem](https://github.com/ddnexus/pagy) recommends using the raw syntax `<%== pagy_nav(@pagy) if @pagy.pages > 1 %>`. This is safe to use because the output of the `pagy_nav` is handled by the gem and that there's very little risk to XSS as a result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`pagy` gem](https://github.com/ddnexus/pagy) recommends using the raw syntax `<%== pagy_nav(@pagy) if @pagy.pages > 1 %>`. This is safe to use because the output of `pagy_nav` is handled by the gem and there's very little risk of XSS as a result.
```

> The two reasons you might see this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The are two reasons where you might see this:
```

Right?

> The are two reasons where you might see this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The are two other cases where using unescaped HTML is okay:
```

> One is for performance, because there is a small overhead to managing the sanitization of each of the strings, but if you have a large amount of text you might see a performance benefit from avoiding the escaping.

Reviewer: This paragraph/sentence needs tidying up!

Maybe: One is for performance. There is a small overhead...

Author: ```suggestion
One is for performance. There is a small overhead to managing the sanitization of each of the strings. If you have a large amount or very long strings you _may_ see a performance improvement by avoiding the escaping.
```

> One is for performance. There is a small overhead to managing the sanitization of each of the strings. If you have a large amount or very long strings you _may_ see a performance improvement by avoiding the escaping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One is for performance. There is a small overhead to managing the sanitization of each string. If you have a large amount or very long strings you _may_ see a performance improvement by avoiding the escaping.
```

> The _other_ is where managing the escaping of complicated strings is tricky, but that is _precisely_ where you need to do the work to properly manage potentially treacherous input yourself, or let the framework take the strain.

Reviewer: Why is "other" emphasised?

Author: ```suggestion
The other is where managing the escaping of complicated strings is tricky, but that is _precisely_ where you need to do the work to properly manage potentially treacherous input yourself, or let the framework take the strain.
```
